



Literature Review
Team VIRUS: Viral Investigation in Rats to Understand the glymphatic System
Paul Butz,  Lucas Cheng, Riddhi Gopal, Anna Lin, Folarin Onifade, Robin Sultan
Mentor: Dr. Yanjin Zhang, D.V.M., MSc, Ph.D. Associate Professor
"We pledge on our honor that we have not given or received any unauthorized assistance on this assignment."



Abbreviations
APP		β-amyloid protein
AQP4		Aquaporin 4
CSF		Cerebrospinal Fluid
CNS		Central Nervous System
DNA		Deoxyribonucleic Acid
FPT 		Fluorescein Protein Tracking
HSV-1 	Herpes Simplex Virus Type 1
ISF 		Interstitial Fluid
LCMV		Lymphocytic Choriomeningitis
TBI		Traumatic Brain Injury
(TLR)-2	Toll-like receptor 2
TLR9		Toll-like receptor 9
TNF		Tumor necrosis factor
TPM		Two Photon Microscopy





Introduction
	Alzheimer’s disease is defined by the Alzheimer's association as a neurodegenerative disease characterized by slow irreversible deterioration of memory and cognitive function (Alzheimer's Association, 2015).  In a recent study published by the Alzheimer's Association,    Changing the Trajectory of Alzheimer's Disease: How a Treatment by 2025 Saves Lives and Dollars, the total cost of the care of the disease was calculated.  Due to an increasing population age, current models predict that by the year 2050 the number of senior citizens diagnosed with the disease will jump from current levels of 5.1 million to 13.5 million, an estimated 16% of the elderly population (Alzheimer's Association, 2015).  In addition, the cost of treatment between Alzheimer's disease and other common diseases is vastly unproportional.  The study estimates that the current cost of treatment hovers around $266 billion, with medicare and medicaid only covering approximately 68% of the medical expenses; however, this number is expected to inflate by 2050 to $1.1 trillion with 70% of the expenses covered by government plans such as medicare and medicaid which creates an enormous burden placed on taxpayers and on an already unstable national healthcare system (Alzheimer's Association, 2015). 
While the cause of Alzheimer's is currently unknown, scientists have still been able to identify numerous physiological changes that occur due to Alzheimer’s.  Perhaps the most notable of these is the accumulation of β-amyloid proteins.  While these proteins are normal byproducts within the brain, scientists have determined that decreased clearance of these proteins lead to the increase degradation of β-amyloid proteins, and strongly hypothesize that this leads to Alzheimer's despite not knowing the exact mechanism how (Tanzi, 2005).  Therefore, with twenty years of research as a base, the choice of using β-amyloid interaction has always been a constant.  However, recent discoveries have shed light that could potentially change the tried method of testing for how this protein accumulates.  


Background on Herpes simplex Virus Type 1 and the Glymphatic System
Herpesvirus Classifications
	The general virus, herpesvirus, has three classifications: α herpesvirus, β herpesvirus, and γ herpesvirus (Whitley, 1996).  The virus the team will be analyzing will be herpes simplex virus type-1 (HSV-1) which falls under α herpesvirus classifications.  The viruses that are classified as α herpesvirus have specific characteristics that include having a short replicative cycle and having a broad host range (Whitley, 1996).  

Herpes simplex Virus Type 1 Structure 
     HSV-1 is a nuclear replicating enveloped virus, meaning it has double stranded deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) surrounded by a protein capsid and a phospholipid membrane (Arduino & Porter, 2008). The overall structure of a Herpes simplex virion can be reduced to three main structural components: the nucleocapsid, the tegument, and the lipid envelope (Arduino & Porter, 2008).  In most viruses, the nucleocapsid is the innermost membrane in the virion that contains the genome of the virus; the HSV-1 nucleocapsid has an icosahedral structure and contains the double stranded DNA of the virus and is located in the center of the virion.  Surrounding the virion is the viral envelope, which is a membrane consisting of a lipid bilayer and eleven documented  glycoproteins attached to the viral envelope specifically for the purpose of binding and interacting with host cells (Kelly, Fraefel, Cunningham, & Diefenbach, 2009).   In between the viral envelope and the nucleocapsid is the tegument which is a region of proteins produced by the virus.  The functions of the proteins that reside in the tegument vary based on the protein, but many have been proven to aid in the multiple processes involved in viral replication (Kelly, Fraefel, Cunningham, & Diefenbach, 2009).  

Pathology of the Virus
When the HSV-1 is first introduced orally into the host organism, the virus becomes dormant in the nerve tissues in the face, but sometimes will reactivate later (Vorvick, 2014).  Once reactivated, the virus first infects the oral mucosa which is a protective lining found in the mouth surrounding the oral cavity and the esophagus (Squier & Kremer, 2001).  During infection, the glycoproteins on the viral envelope bind to the host mucosal cell surface receptors so that viral replication can occur (Arduino & Porter, 2008).  Viral replication of the HSV-1 requires the involvement of all three major structural components.  Once attached to the cell, the glycoproteins bind to the host cell surface receptors, the viral envelope fuses with the host cell membrane and allows the nucleocapsid to enter the inner membrane with the help of multiple proteins from the tegument region.  The nucleocapsid then releases the viral genome into the host nucleus and the host cell then replicates the viral genome to in a specific order: immediate-early genes, early genes, and late genes (Whitley, 1996).  These genes encode regulatory proteins, enzymes for replicating viral DNA and structural proteins, respectively to create virions that cause the same host cell’s death as the virions are released  (Arduino & Porter, 2008; Whitley, 1996). 

Transmission and Epidemiology in Humans 
In the U.S., an estimated 50 to 80 percent of adults have oral herpes (HSV-1) and approximately 90 percent of adults have been exposed to the virus, most of whom were infected by age 20 (Johns Hopkins Medicine, 2015; Vorvick, 2014).  The large amount of HSV-1 cases can be attributed in part to how contagious the virus spreads.  HSV-1 specifically, is spread through direct contact with an infected person’s saliva from activities such as kissing, sharing items that came in contact with the infected saliva, and oral sex from an infected person.  Cases of HSV-2 can also be attributed an HSV-1 infected person spreading the virus to the genitals of another person (Ehrlich, 2013).  Another mode of contraction could be by indirect or direct contact with an open herpes sore, or something that has been in direct contact such as razors, towels, and dishes (Vorvick, 2014).  Herpes can also be spread to children from their parents from daily activities that involve direct contact (Vorvick, 2014).  
Both Herpes simplex virus type 1 and 2 are incurable so if a person is infected, he or she will have the herpes simplex virus for a lifetime, though some may not experience any symptoms at all (Johns Hopkins Medicine, 2015).  The main recognizable symptoms that can be experienced by patients infected with HSV-1 can be sorted into two categories: warning symptoms and outbreak.  HSV-1 is well recognized for its outbreak symptoms: blisters or rashes around the mouth.  These blisters could either be red, open leaking blisters, small clear yellow blisters, or small blisters that converge into a large blister.  These fluid-filled blisters are often referred to as cold sores. 
Though the virus itself is incurable, multiple ointment and drug treatments for the symptoms of oral herpes exist if the cold sores do not simply recede by themselves in one to two weeks (Vorvick, 2014).  Though oral herpes itself is not usually life threatening, it will stay with a patient for life and could result in conditions that are life threatening to infected infants or people with weak immune systems (Ehrlich, 2013).  After the first appearance of cold sores, a recurrent or secondary infection of HSV-1 is not common, but does occur in 20-40% of cases (Arduino & Porter, 2008).

Herpes simplex Virus Type 1 Infection in Sensory Nerves and the Central Nervous System   
Herpes simplex Virus Type 1 is popularly believed to be confined to the oral cavity due to the presence of cold sores usually appearing around or inside of the mouth.  However, it is well documented that HSV-1 is neurovirulent (Whitley, Kimberlin, & Roizman, 1998).  The pathogenesis of HSV-1 as it pertains to the CNS shows that the herpes virus reaches the CNS via centripetal infection of endoneurial cells and remains thereafter in the CSF as indicated by fluorescent antiviral tracers (Johnson, 1963).  In addition, after the initial infection of the mucous lining of the oral cavity, HSV-1 is able to enter sensory nerve endings and from there infect sensory neurons and neuronal bodies and retrogradely travel to the dorsal root ganglia.  When the HSV-1 has entered the neuron, the viral replication can enter a latent phase where the virus remains present, but inactive in the body.  This latency is also encouraged by the host human’s immune system.  When microglial cells detect the presence of HSV-1 through the cell receptors (TLR)-2 or TLR9, these cells release small signaling proteins called cytokines. Specifically, they release tumor necrosis factors (TNF) which triggers mechanisms that control viral replication and inhibit the reactivation of the HSV-1 (Ousman & Kubes, 2012).  
At a later time, spontaneously or based on currently certain factors, the virus can exit the latency phase, reactivate, and attack the host body again.  Though a healthy immune system may be able to inhibit HSV-1 and keep the virus in its latency phase, when the system is compromised and HSV-1 is allowed to reactivate, the virus can have disastrous effects on the CNS (Conrady, Drevets, & Carr, 2009).  For example, though cases of Herpesviral encephalitis are rare, it has been proven 70% of cases are brought on by recurrent infections of HSV-1.  Of these cases, there is a reported 70% mortality rate in untreated patients and 30% mortality rate in treated patients (Yao, Ling, Tung, Hsu, & Chen, 2014). 

The Glymphatic System
Just as the complex network of the lymphatic system removes metabolic waste products from the body, the newly discovered glymphatic system also regulates the flow of wastes from the intercellular space within the brain.  The glymphatic system uses perivascular channels, formed by astroglial cells, around the brain’s existing blood vessels, that forcefully flush cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) containing proteins and metabolites (Jessen, Munk, Lundgaard, Nedergaard, 2015).  The glial cells, specifically astrocytes, use projections known as end feet to form a network around the outsides of arteries and veins inside the brain (University of Rochester Medical Center [URMC], 2012).  These end feet are filled with water channels, aquaporin-4 (AQP4), which move the CSF throughout the brain.  The CSF is pumped into the brain along the channels that surround the arteries where it is then washed through the brain tissue before collecting in channels around veins and draining from the brain (URMC, 2012).  Studies show that traumatic brain injury (TBI) can severely damage the glymphatic system, with reductions in efficiency of up to 60% (Iliff, et. al, 2014).  In addition, ischemia resulting from complications such as stroke is shown to lead to pericyte dysfunction within the endothelial cells (Marinescu, et. Al, 2013).  When the glymphatic system does not function properly in the brain, there are many implications, many of which include neurodegenerative diseases, such as Alzheimer’s, Parkinson’s, and Huntington’s disease (Jessen, Munk, Lundgaard, Nedergaard, 2015).  
When researchers studied the glymphatic system through two photon microscopy to locate fluorescent tracers in the brains of live mice, they found that hyperphosphorylated proteins, tau and β-amyloid proteins, produced neurotoxic conditions that lead to Alzheimer’s disease (Nedergaard, 2013).  During their initial research experiment, they found that CSF exchanged rapidly with interstitial fluid (ISF) through three routes: a para-arterial CSF influx route, a paravenous ISF clearance route, and an intracellular transastrocytic route that couples the two extracellular paravascular routes.  They found that CSF passes through the para-arterial space around the arteries.  With the help of APQ4, there is convective flow out of the para-arterial space into the interstitial space.  As CSF exchanges with ISF, convective flow drives waste products from the arteries into the veins.  The ISF then carries the remainder of  the fluid out of the brain and into the paravenous route, where it reaches the lymphatic vessels in the neck, and exits to the systemic circuits throughout the body (Nedergaard, 2013).  However, when the mice had mislocated AQP4 water channels, the glymphatic system of these mice did not clear as much soluble proteins as it did in mice with normal AQP4 water channels (Nedergaard, 2013).  With the accumulation of β-amyloid proteins in the brain, and the oligomer assembly state being the most harmful, the brain’s glutamatergic synaptic transmission becomes reduced, causing synaptic loss (Palop, Mucke, 2010).  As a result, the amyloid-β-induced synaptic depression can contribute to synaptic N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor (NMDAR) desensitization.  Because NMDAR is an important glutamate receptor and ion channel protein on nerve cells, any damage to the receptor can lead to weakened neurons and loss of normal memory function, all of which are physiological symptoms of Alzheimer’s disease (Palop, Mucke, 2010). 

Relationship between HSV-1 and Alzheimer’s Disease
The glymphatic system is mainly comprised of glial cells and when HSV-1 enters the CNS, there is a high possibility HSV-1 infects glial cells across the CNS which therefore, could have an impact on the glymphatic system.  According to a study done measuring the attachment of HSV-1 virions to glial cells and neurons, though mouse glial cells did not absorb HSV-1 virions as well as synaptosomal fractions, it did significantly absorb more HSV-1 virions than the fractions of nerve cell perikarya.  It is theorized that infected glial cells allow for the HSV-1 to efficiently replicate and spread over the CNS. Infected glial cells are also strongly believed to contribute to encephalitis (Vahlne, Svennerholm, Sandberg, Hamberger, & Lycke, 1980). 
In addition to its direct impact on the CNS and possible impact on glial cells, HSV-1 has been linked to neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer's disease.  Studies show the potential for a link between HSV-1 presence in the CNS and Alzheimer's disease because HSV-1 prompts inflammation in the CNS which results in cell death and neurodegenerative disorders (Piacentini et. al, 2014).  When examining Alzheimer's patients, a strange correlation arose between the prevalence of Herpes Simplex Virus type 1 (HSV-1) and Alzheimer's disease.  Researchers found that HSV-1 resides latently within the central nervous system and can cause a number of neurological conditions such as encephalitis in regions commonly affected by Alzheimer's disease (Itzhaki, et. al 1997).

Past Researching Regarding HSV-1 and the Glymphatic System
Though HSV-1 has a clear influence and presence in the CNS, its link to neurodegenerative diseases is still not definitive or well proven.  As previously stated, the glymphatic system has been defined to be critical in brain functions that could possibly prevent the onset of neurodegenerative diseases.  HSV-1 infection of the CNS could have an impact on the function of the glymphatic system and its rate of removal of metabolic waste in the CNS.  If this possible link were proven, possible questions concerning environmental or viral influences on neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer’s disease could be answered. 

Modeling, Techniques and Justification
Cell Models
	Although cell models would most likely be easier and cheaper to use, when analyzing the glymphatic system a cell model would not be the right model.  The glymphatic system is a hydraulic system, Nedergaard comments that once the system has been opened, connections are broken and the functionality of the system is lost in the process (URMC, 2012).  

Using a Rat Model to Study Neurodegenerative Diseases and functions of the CNS
	One of the reasons to use a rat model for this type of experiment is because rat brains are highly similar to human brains.  The β-amyloid precursor protein (APP), which can be a leading cause of neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer’s when there is a build-up, is expressed at high levels in mammalian brains.  APP does so by polymerizing to form brain amyloids characteristics of Alzheimer’s (Farber, Nitsch, Schulz, & Wurtman, 1995).  The protein was studied in rat models in the Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences at Massachusetts Institute of Technology.  The team of researchers analyzed APP in different parts of the rat brain: cortex, hippocampus, striatum, and cerebellum (Farber, Nitsch, Schulz, & Wurtman, 1995).  All four sections of the brain did in fact release APP at a basal rate, and the scientists also found that electrical stimulation could enhance these results without affecting the number and rate of release of the protein.  More specifically, APP was found in twice the quantity in the hippocampal slices over the other slices (Farber, Nitsch, Schulz, & Wurtman, 1995). 
Moreover, another rat study conducted by Daniel J. Bonthius and Stanley Perlman proved that rat models continue to be beneficial.  According to their study, Lymphocytic Choriomeningitis (LMCV), a well-known human pathogen that occurs during pregnancy, is a fetal pathogen that induces severe neurological deficits (Bonthius & Perlman, 2007).  Moreover, the neurodegenerative disease is typically virus-mediated or immune-mediated and can lead to many bodily problems such as headache, fever, myalgia, photophobia, and vomiting.  Through his research, Bonthius displays that “progress toward understanding the pathogenesis of most perinatal infections is limited by the absence of animal models that mirror human disease” (Bonthius & Perlman, 2007).  He helps society understand that animal models are a necessary contribution to science.  More specifically, his study focuses on injecting rats with LMCV during their neonatal period to monitor the effects of LCMV in secondary gestation in the rats.  This is because the first two weeks of postnatal brain development in rats mimics the second half of human gestation.  With careful experimentation, Bonthius’ research concludes that age has a profound effect on the LMCV infection (Bonthius & Perlman, 2007).  According to Figure 1, age is a factor that allows one to determine the different cellular targets of infection. As seen below, Figure 1 shows the varying degrees to which an aged cell is affected by LMCV. It displays CT scans for different time intervals for rats infected with LMCV to convey that the 30 day old neonatal rat is affected at a slower rate than the 14 day old neonatal rat. 


Figure 1. LCMV Infection Induces Lesions within the Developing Brains of Rats. (A) A CT scan of a 4 month old reveals two lateral regions of Encephalomalacia. The scan denotes a dangerous focal process. (B) Section of cerebellar cortex has been immunohistochemically stained for MCV antigens. And areas affected include granule cells and purkinje cells. (C) Nissel-stained section through the cerebellar vermis of a 30-d-old rat. The ten lobules of the rat are numbered from I to X. (D) Section of cerebellar vermis in a 30-d-old rat infected with LMCV 3 weeks prior. Most of system has been destroyed due to LMCV, but sections I,II, III, and X have yet to be affected. (E) Section of cerebellar cortex of a 14-d-old neonatal rat infected 10 days earlier. Rat was sacrificed at the beginning of acute damage to cerebellar cortex. Bonthius, D. J., & Perlman, S. (2007). Congenital Viral Infections of the Brain: Lessons Learned from Lymphocytic Choriomeningitis Virus in the Neonatal Rat. PLoS Pathogens, 3(11), e149–1550. http://doi.org/10.1371/journal.ppat.0030149

The similarities between the rat’s brain and the human’s brain from these past studies is enough to justify the use of a rat brain in this research project in regards to the β-amyloid precursor protein.  However, the main focus of the research is on the glymphatic system.  Recently in 2013, research was conducted that evaluated the glymphatic pathway and CSF tracers in rat and mouse brains (Kress BT et al., 2013).  CSF tracers were inserted into the lumbar spine of the rodents and tracer influx was inserted into similar brain regions to the previous studies: the cortex, white matter, subcortical structures, and hippocampus.  The trackers were traced by ex vivo fluorescence imaging of brain slices from the rat and mouse after 30-180 minutes after the original injection (Kress BT et al., 2013).  Following the study, the team discovered that there is an existence of a “brain-wise perivascular route,” which is now known as the glymphatic pathway.  The movement of the cerebral fluid flushed out the β-amyloid precursor protein from the brain which was found earlier to be a trigger for Alzheimer’s and other neurodegenerative diseases.  


Two Photon Microscopy to Trace Viral Replication Pathway in the CNS
	Two Photon Microscopy (TPM) is a process that incorporates the use of fluorescent dyes to pinpoint the location of two distinct molecules (Palikaras & Tavernarakis, 2002).  TPM segments light to different diffraction-limited volumes that scans samples for fluorescent volume in three dimensions using a galvanometer-driven x–y scanner and a piezo-objective z-driver.  The multiphoton microscopes scan, line by line, in order to determine the independent location of molecules and show the proximity of the two dyed molecules (Palikaras & Tavernarakis, 2002).  In addition,  Fluorescein Protein Tracking (FPT) is the application of fluorescent proteins ranging from organelles to protein fusions in in vivo probes for monitoring intracellular dynamics through whole body-imaging (Rizzo, Davidson, & Piston, 2009).  In reference to Figure 2, FPT utilizes a laser beam that excites dyed molecules within the cross-sectional area that is being examined.  According to Figure 3, electrons in these molecules are excited to higher energy level (vibrational state) and once relaxed (electronic level) emit a certain wavelength due to the difference in energy levels (Palikaras & Tavernarakis, 2002).  It also shows how the TPM releases more energy than the one photon microscope.  
	

Figure 2. Two Photon Microscope close up of NADH and Astrocytes. Red dye is NADH and the green dye is sulforhodamine-labeled astrocytes. Optical Filters for Multiphoton Microscopy. (n.d.). Retrieved September 27, 2015, from http://www.photonics.com/Article.aspx?AID=43009




Figure 3. Difference between Light Emission from a One Photon Microscope and a Two Photon Microscope. One Photon Microscope captures all of the green fluorescence and must release it at a lower wavelength which means a different color in the wavelength spectra (nm)  than original energy capture. The Two Photon microscope captures the light from the green fluorescence and releases the same amount of energy because it can capture and emit more light. The Two Photon Microscope  is better because it provides a better resolution for the sample trying to be examined. 
Palikaras, K., & Tavernarakis, N. (2002). Multiphoton Fluorescence Light Microscopy. eLS. Retrieved from http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/9780470015902.a0002991.pub2/full


Summary 
Since the discovery of the glymphatic system, much research has been done to expand upon knowledge about the waste clearing system in the CNS and its connection to neurodegenerative disorders like Alzheimer's.  Unlike many recent studies dealing with the glymphatic system, this research will focus on a virologist approach to the system.  This research will focus on examining and explaining the correlation between high levels of HSV-1 activation and Alzheimer's in elderly patients through the virus’s impact on the glymphatic system.  Through the use of animal and cell models, our team hypothesizes that HSV-1 leads to a decrease in glymphatic function by either lowering glymphatic perfusion or inhibiting the ability for the brain to remove a number of specific metabolic byproducts. 


References
Arduino, P. G., & Porter, S. R. (2008). Herpes Simplex Virus Type 1 infection: overview on relevant clinico-pathological features*. Journal of Oral Pathology & Medicine, 37(2), 107–121. http://doi.org/10.1111/j.1600-0714.2007.00586.x
Blanke, M. L., & VanDongen, A. M. J. (2009). Activation Mechanisms of the NMDA Receptor. In A. M. Van Dongen (Ed.), Biology of the NMDA Receptor. Boca Raton (FL): CRC Press. Retrieved from http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK5274/
Conrady, C. D., Drevets, D. A., & Carr, D. J. J. (2010). Herpes simplex type I (HSV-1) infection of the nervous system: Is an immune response a good thing? Journal of Neuroimmunology, 220(1–2), 1–9. http://doi.org/10.1016/j.jneuroim.2009.09.013
De Ory, F., Avellón, A., Echevarría, J. e., Sánchez-Seco, M. p., Trallero, G., Cabrerizo, M., … Vázquez-Morón, S. (2013). Viral infections of the central nervous system in Spain: A prospective study. Journal of Medical Virology, 85(3), 554–562. http://doi.org/10.1002/jmv.23470
Ehrlich, S. (2013, August 21). Herpes simplex virus. Retrieved September 23, 2015, from http://umm.edu/health/medical/altmed/condition/herpes-simplex-virus
Farber, S. A., Nitsch, R. M., Schulz, J. G., & Wurtman, R. J. (1995). Regulated secretion of beta-amyloid precursor protein in rat brain. The Journal of Neuroscience, 15(11), 7442–7451.
Frautschy, S. A., Baird, A., & Cole, G. M. (1991). Effects of injected Alzheimer beta-amyloid cores in rat brain. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 88(19), 8362–8366.

Galvanometer | measurement instrument. (n.d.). Retrieved September 27, 2015, from http://www.britannica.com/technology/galvanometer
Iliff, J. J., Chen, M. J., Plog, B. A., Zeppenfeld, D. M., Soltero, M., Yang, L., … Nedergaard, M. (2014). Impairment of Glymphatic Pathway Function Promotes Tau Pathology after Traumatic Brain Injury. The Journal of Neuroscience, 34(49), 16180–16193. http://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3020-14.2014
Itzhaki, R. F. (2014). Herpes simplex virus type 1 and Alzheimer’s disease: increasing evidence for a major role of the virus. Frontiers in Aging Neuroscience, 6. http://doi.org/10.3389/fnagi.2014.00202
Jessen, N. A., Munk, A. S. F., Lundgaard, I., & Nedergaard, M. (2015). The Glymphatic System: A Beginner’s Guide. Neurochemical Research. http://doi.org/10.1007/s11064-015-1581-6
Johnson, R. T. (1964). THE PATHOGENESIS OF HERPES VIRUS ENCEPHALITIS. The Journal of Experimental Medicine, 119(2), 343–356. Retrieved fromhttp://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2137831/
Kelly, B. J., Fraefel, C., Cunningham, A. L., & Diefenbach, R. J. (2009). Functional roles of the tegument proteins of herpes simplex virus type 1. Virus Research, 145(2), 173–186. http://doi.org/10.1016/j.virusres.2009.07.007
of CSF tracer. Journal of Translational Medicine, 11(1), 107. http://doi.org/10.1186/1479-5876-11-107
Machida, C. A. (Ed.). (2003). Viral vectors for gene therapy: methods and protocols. Totowa, N.J: Humana Press.
Marinescu, Dragos, Mogoanta, Lairemtoi, Sfera, Adonis, Gradini, Roberto, Osorio, Carolina, & Preda, Adrian. (2013). An Experimental Model Of Ischemia-Induced Changes Into The Glymphatic System of the Brain, (13), 243–251.
Mobasheri, A., Marples, D., Young, I. S., Floyd, R. V., Moskaluk, C. A., & Frigeri, A. (2007). Distribution of the AQP4 water channel in normal human tissues: protein and tissue microarrays reveal expression in several new anatomical locations, including the prostate gland and seminal vesicles. Channels (Austin, Tex.), 1(1), 29–38.
Mouth Infections. (2015). [Encyclopedia of medicine and diseases]. Retrieved from http://www.hopkinsmedicine.org/healthlibrary/conditions/oral_health/mouth_infections_85,P00888/
Nedergaard, M. (2013). Garbage Truck of the Brain. Science (New York, N.Y.), 340(6140), 1529–1530. http://doi.org/10.1126/science.1240514
Optical Filters for Multiphoton Microscopy. (n.d.). Retrieved September 27, 2015, from http://www.photonics.com/Article.aspx?AID=43009
Ousman, S. S., & Kubes, P. (2012). Immune surveillance in the central nervous system. Nat Neurosci, 15(8), 1096–1101.
Palikaras, K., & Tavernarakis, N. (2002). Multiphoton Fluorescence Light Microscopy. eLS. Retrieved from http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/9780470015902.a0002991.pub2/full
Palop, J. J., & Mucke, L. (2010). Amyloid-β-induced neuronal dysfunction in Alzheimer’s disease: from synapses toward neural networks. Nature Neuroscience, 13(7), 812–818. http://doi.org/10.1038/nn.2583
Piacentini, R., De Chiara, G., Li Puma, D. D., Ripoli, C., Marcocci, M. E., Garaci, E., … Grassi, C. (2014). HSV-1 and Alzheimer’s disease: more than a hypothesis. Frontiers in Pharmacology, 5. http://doi.org/10.3389/fphar.2014.00097
Rizzo, M. A., Davidson, M. W., & Piston, D. W. (2009). Fluorescent Protein Tracking and Detection: Fluorescent Protein Structure and Color Variants. Cold Spring Harbor Protocols, 2009(12), pdb.top63. http://doi.org/10.1101/pdb.top63
Scientists Discover Previously Unknown Cleansing System in Brain. (2012, August 15). Retrieved September 26, 2015, from https://www.urmc.rochester.edu/news/story/3584/scientists-discover-previously-unknown-cleansing-system-in-brain.aspx
Squier, C. A., & Kremer, M. J. (2001). Biology of Oral Mucosa and Esophagus. JNCI Monographs, 2001(29), 7–15.
Vahlne, A., Svennerholm, B., Sandberg, M., Hamberger, A., & Lycke, E. (1980). Differences in attachment between herpes simplex type 1 and type 2 viruses to neurons and glial cells. Infection and Immunity, 28(3), 675–680.
Vorvick, L. (2014, November 2). Herpes - oral: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia. Retrieved September 23, 2015, from https://www.nlm.nih.gov/medlineplus/ency/article/000606.htm
Watakabe, A., Komatsu, Y., Ohsawa, S., & Yamamori, T. (2010). Fluorescent in situ hybridization technique for cell type identification and characterization in the central nervous system. Methods, 52(4), 367–374. http://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymeth.2010.07.003
Whitley, R. J. (1996). Herpesviruses. In S. Baron (Ed.), Medical Microbiology (4th ed.). Galveston (TX): University of Texas Medical Branch at Galveston. Retrieved from http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK8157/
Whitley, R. J., Kimberlin, D. W., & Roizman, B. (1998). Herpes Simplex Viruses. Clinical Infectious Diseases, 26(3), 541–553.
Wiegraebe, W. (n.d.). Two-Photon Microscopy, Non-Linear Optics (NLO). Stowers Institute for Medical Research. Retrieved from http://research.stowers-institute.org/microscopy/external/Technology/NLO/index.htm
Wiig, H., & Swartz, M. A. (2012). Interstitial Fluid and Lymph Formation and Transport: Physiological Regulation and Roles in Inflammation and Cancer. Physiological Reviews, 92(3), 1005–1060. http://doi.org/10.1152/physrev.00037.2011
Yang, L., Kress, B. T., Weber, H. J., Thiyagarajan, M., Wang, B., Deane, R., … Nedergaard, M. (2013). Evaluating glymphatic pathway function utilizing clinically relevant intrathecal infusion 
Yao, H.-W., Ling, P., Tung, Y.-Y., Hsu, S.-M., & Chen, S.-H. (2014). In Vivo Reactivation of Latent Herpes Simplex Virus 1 in Mice Can Occur in the Brain before Occurring in the Trigeminal Ganglion. Journal of Virology, 88(19), 11264–11270. http://doi.org/10.1128/JVI.01616-14


